sop.md, before:

# Sergeant-at-Arms Standard Operating Procedures

## Personnel

The sergeant-at-arms (SAA) team consists of the sergeants-at-arms and the IETF Chair. They can all be reached at saa@ietf.org, which has a private archive accessible only to the SAA team.

## General operations

The sergeants-at-arms strive to monitor all postings on ietf@ietf.org on a daily basis. The IETF Chair also monitors the list but may not be in a position to read each message or monitor every day.

When IETF discussion list subscribers believe that a posting may be considered inappropriate according to [RFC 3005] or the [Unprofessional Commentary Description], they are encouraged to report it to saa@ietf.org. Please note that SAA team members are also subscribers to the IETF discussion list and they follow the same process to report posts that they consider inappropriate.

A report made by a member of the SAA team to the rest of the team should include a suggested action in response, including specific text for email(s) to the original poster and/or the list, as appropriate. The SAA team uses a standard set of [email-templates]. Proposed emails to either individuals or to the list must be vetted and approved by at least one other SAA team member before being sent.

## Escalation ladder for handling inappropriate list postings

The SAA team uses the escalation ladder below for handling inappropriate list postings. At each step, the SAA team describes to the individual poster what the next step in the ladder is.

### Level 0: Friendly suggestion

An SAA team member sends an off-list message to the individual on behalf of the SAA team, with saa@ietf.org on cc. This message clearly identifies the concern, offers assistance with re-framing language, and identifies consequences for continued inappropriate postings.

### Level 1: Cooling off period

An SAA team member sends an off-list message to the individual on behalf of the SAA team, with saa@ietf.org on cc. This message clearly identifies the concern, offers assistance with re-framing language, and identifies consequences for continued inappropriate postings. 

The SAA team member also requests that the individual take a voluntary 5-day "cooling off" period during which time the individual does not send email to ietf@ietf.org. The SAA team member informs the individual that a note will be sent to ietf@ietf.org to inform the list that the SAA is engaging with the individual.

### Level 2: Temporary posting rights restriction

An SAA team member sends an off-list message to the individual on behalf of the SAA team, with saa@ietf.org on cc. This message clearly identifies the concern and the pattern of abuse, and offers assistance with re-framing language.

Subject to the approval by the IETF Chair, the SAA team member also informs the individual that his or her posting rights to ietf@ietf.org will be restricted for 14 days. The SAA team member informs the individual that a note will be sent to ietf@ietf.org to inform the list that the SAA has restricted their posting rights.

## Finding a more specific forum

RFC 3005 explains that:

"Discussions that fall within the area of any working group or well established list should be moved to such more specific forum as soon as this is pointed out, unless the issue is one for which the working group needs wider input or direction."

The SAA team will make friendly suggestions to the list in cases where discussions should be moved to more specific forums along with a pointer to the more specific forum(s). 

## Announcements

RFC 3005 considers:

"Announcements of conferences, events, or activities that are not sponsored or endorsed by the Internet Society or IETF" as inappropriate posting. 

The SAA team will make friendly suggestion to the individual off-list (as well as send a reminder on the list) to avoid such posting. If a pattern of abuse emerges, we will consider temporarily restricting the posting rights to ietf@ietf.org. 

## Note

The content of this document was influenced by the [Django Code of Conduct], the [Mozilla Community Participation Guidelines] and [How to Respond to Code of Conduct Reports].


---
[RFC 3005]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3005
[Unprofessional Commentary Description]:  https://github.com/linuxwolf/ietf-saa/blob/master/unprofessional-commentary.md
[email-templates]: https://github.com/linuxwolf/ietf-saa/tree/master/email-templates
[Contributor Covenant]: https://www.contributor-covenant.org/
[Django Code of Conduct]: https://www.djangoproject.com/conduct/
[Mozilla Community Participation Guidelines]: https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/about/governance/policies/participation/
[How to Respond to Code of Conduct Reports]: https://frameshiftconsulting.com/code-of-conduct-book/

Commit message:

Updated general operations text and removed "friendly"

sop.md, after:

# Sergeant-at-Arms Standard Operating Procedures

## Personnel

The sergeant-at-arms (SAA) team consists of the sergeants-at-arms and the IETF Chair. They can all be reached at saa@ietf.org, which has a private archive accessible only to the SAA team.

## General operations

The sergeants-at-arms strive to monitor all postings on ietf@ietf.org on a daily basis. The IETF Chair also monitors the list but may not be in a position to read each message or monitor every day.

When IETF discussion list subscribers believe that a posting may be considered inappropriate according to [RFC 3005] or the [Unprofessional Commentary Description], they are encouraged to report it to saa@ietf.org. SAA team members are also subscribers to the IETF discussion list and they follow the same process to report posts that they consider inappropriate.The SAA team will discuss all reports received and make a determination about whether they believe the posting was inappropriate. At least two team members must agree that a posting was inappropriate before the SAA team takes any action in response.

When the SAA team determines that a posting is inappropriate, one team member suggests a response to the rest of the team, including specific text for email(s) to the original poster and/or the list, as appropriate. The SAA team uses a standard set of [email templates]. Proposed emails to either individuals or to the list must be vetted and approved by at least one other SAA team member before being sent.



## Escalation ladder for handling inappropriate list postings

The SAA team uses the escalation ladder below for handling inappropriate list postings. At each step, the SAA team describes to the individual poster what the next step in the ladder is.

### Level 0: Initial suggestion

An SAA team member sends an off-list message to the individual on behalf of the SAA team, with saa@ietf.org on cc. This message clearly identifies the concern, offers assistance with re-framing language, and identifies consequences for continued inappropriate postings.

### Level 1: Cooling off period

An SAA team member sends an off-list message to the individual on behalf of the SAA team, with saa@ietf.org on cc. This message clearly identifies the concern, offers assistance with re-framing language, and identifies consequences for continued inappropriate postings. 

The SAA team member also requests that the individual take a voluntary 5-day "cooling off" period during which time the individual does not send email to ietf@ietf.org. The SAA team member informs the individual that a note will be sent to ietf@ietf.org to inform the list that the SAA is engaging with the individual.

### Level 2: Temporary posting rights restriction

An SAA team member sends an off-list message to the individual on behalf of the SAA team, with saa@ietf.org on cc. This message clearly identifies the concern and the pattern of abuse, and offers assistance with re-framing language.

Subject to the approval by the IETF Chair, the SAA team member also informs the individual that his or her posting rights to ietf@ietf.org will be restricted for 14 days. The SAA team member informs the individual that a note will be sent to ietf@ietf.org to inform the list that the SAA has restricted their posting rights.

## Finding a more specific forum

RFC 3005 explains that:

"Discussions that fall within the area of any working group or well established list should be moved to such more specific forum as soon as this is pointed out, unless the issue is one for which the working group needs wider input or direction."

The SAA team will make suggestions to the list in cases where discussions should be moved to more specific forums along with a pointer to the more specific forum(s). 

## Announcements

RFC 3005 considers:

"Announcements of conferences, events, or activities that are not sponsored or endorsed by the Internet Society or IETF" as inappropriate posting. 

The SAA team will make an initial suggestion to the individual off-list (as well as send a reminder on the list) to avoid such posting. If a pattern of abuse emerges, we will consider temporarily restricting the posting rights to ietf@ietf.org. 

## Note

The content of this document was influenced by the [Django Code of Conduct], the [Mozilla Community Participation Guidelines] and [How to Respond to Code of Conduct Reports].


---
[RFC 3005]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3005
[Unprofessional Commentary Description]:  https://github.com/linuxwolf/ietf-saa/blob/master/unprofessional-commentary.md
[email templates]: https://github.com/linuxwolf/ietf-saa/tree/master/email-templates
[Contributor Covenant]: https://www.contributor-covenant.org/
[Django Code of Conduct]: https://www.djangoproject.com/conduct/
[Mozilla Community Participation Guidelines]: https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/about/governance/policies/participation/
[How to Respond to Code of Conduct Reports]: https://frameshiftconsulting.com/code-of-conduct-book/
